---
layout: post
title: "Plan-F"
author: "Olly Lawson"
categories: shortstories
tags: [australia]
---


It was the driest summer in living memory. Everything, from the vines in the valley to the men in the taverns, was thirsty and dying.

 &#39;Those grapes are cooked alright,&#39; mumbled one such man as he stared at the residue of his rationed schooner, &#39;all that wasted juice.&#39;

 &#39;Tried suckling one the other day. Fucked.&#39;

 &#39;I can&#39;t even top up the wagon anymore- the petrol&#39;s too tempting.&#39;

 &#39;That&#39;s funny,&#39; said the man again, without lifting his head or breaking into even a trace of a smile. &#39;At least it would taste better than this shit.&#39;

 &#39;Where&#39;d you reckon Thorpey gets it?&#39;

 The man shrugged and rubbed his eyes, crusted with dust. &#39;Probably just piss.&#39;

 &#39;Like he&#39;d have any of that spare.&#39;

 &#39;Mmm.&#39;

 Trees stood skeletal and black in the baking sun; straw swept the blistering tarmac, peeling yellow off the orange hills.

 &#39;You know I heard they found Jesse still working her shift last night. Colour of a beetroot she was.&#39;

 &#39;Yeah?&#39;

 &#39;Yeah- you know what she&#39;s like.&#39;

 &#39;Mmm.&#39;

 Tongues turned stiff with salt flailed listlessly in arid mouths.

 &#39;How does she do it though?&#39;

 &#39;Do what?&#39;

 &#39;I don&#39;t know, whatever she does.&#39;

 The man just shrugged.

 &#39;She still down by the river?&#39;

 &#39;What river? When that brother of hers comes around she&#39;s the wettest thing around.&#39;

 A laugh as coarse as sandpaper.

 &#39;Seriously though, I&#39;m pretty sure I haveseen her out and about-now that I think about it.&#39;

 &#39;Get fucked- look at it out there.&#39;

 He didn&#39;t even need to glance out of the window. He knew the childless streets and the flaking paint of the houses well enough.

 &#39;No but I think I have. You don&#39;t miss that wispy white hair now, do you?&#39;

 &#39;Usually can&#39;t fucking see her at all. Midget of a thing. And what would she be doing out there anyway? Weeds don&#39;t grow in a desert.&#39;

 &#39;I don&#39;t know… But no, I definitely _have_ seen her.&#39; Something began to stir in his mind like rustled leaves in a breeze. &#39;Actually, I&#39;ve seen her heaps. Yeah! Earlier this week she was pruning some of the cab sav- gnarled it was but that didn&#39;t stop her… And then I saw her- when was it- yesterday? No, yeah- maybe today as well. That white wispy hair, definitely, I definitely saw it. It was bobbing around in the hedgerows- you know the way it does?&#39;

 &#39;Yeah I know-&#39;

 &#39;Yeah, and fuck, I even spoke to her.&#39;

 &#39;Yeah? What did you say?&#39;

 &#39;I asked her what she was doing, the silly old bint- I said, &quot;oi Jesse, those weeds are dead, what&#39;s the point?&quot; And then she turned to me and said- and you know that funny little voice she has-&#39;

 &#39;Yeah that gets me every time-&#39;

 &#39;Yeah well she said that she was just dealing with a bit of a brute of a root- hey, that even rhymes- and then she said she was on plan F.&#39;

 &#39;Plan F?&#39;

 &#39;Yeah Plan F, so obviously I asked her- &quot;what the fuck&#39;s plan F Jesse?&quot; And she goes &quot;ah well, you see I tried plan A- didn&#39;t work, so I tried plan B and it didn&#39;t work either, so then I tried plan C and D but they did fuck all. As for plan E- well, let&#39;s just say that that was a few syllables short of a letter&quot;-&#39;

 &#39;That doesn&#39;t even make-&#39;

 &#39;&quot;so then I moved onto plan F&quot; she said, &quot;plan fuck-it-and-crack-on.&quot; Honestly I pissed myself.&#39;

 &#39;That is pretty funny,&#39; said the man, beginning to show the creaking signs of a smile not seen in weeks. &#39;And you say she&#39;s out there again today?&#39;

 &#39;Yeah- I forgot that I saw her this morning, just as I was making my way here actually. Busy little bee she is- and out in that stinking heat.&#39;

 &#39;Mmm.&#39;

 &#39;Yeah, so I guess that&#39;s quite interesting.&#39;

 &#39;Yeah?&#39;

 &#39;Yeah- I mean, we&#39;re just kinda sitting here and look at our empty glasses- whilst she does all the work. I mean, I know it&#39;s hot out there-&#39;

 &#39;It&#39;s not just fucking hot-&#39;

 &#39;but I can&#39;t imagine my old man letting that get in the way of him. As for my G-pa, Christ, you tried stopping him go out in that and he&#39;d throw you a hand to catch alright. Hell, he always used to say that a man without work can go real funny; &quot;no good to anyone is a man without some work to do&quot;, he used to say.&#39;

 &#39;Well that&#39;s a real pretty motto and all, but what in all that&#39;s holy would we be doing out there? There isn&#39;t any work to be done. Everything&#39;s burnt to a crisp, there&#39;s no juice-it&#39;s all just dead. And you know what? Honestly, I feel more than a little bit dead myself.&#39;

 &#39;Nah- plan F: fuck-it-and-crack-on. I like that a lot- sounds kinda noble if you ask me.&#39;

 &#39;I didn&#39;t, and it doesn&#39;t.&#39;

 &#39;Whatever man.&#39;

 Eyes glazed over as silence fell between them once again. It was dark in the tavern now, and still no sign of anyone else coming in for a drink.

And then, all of a sudden, a soft patter came from the window. They craned their reddened necks to see what the cause of the noise was. Much to their surprise Jesse was standing there waving and smiling; her face strangely distorted like it was melting off her skull. And then they realized that it&#39;s wasn&#39;t melting off her skull at all; it was raining, thick and clear. Water was drumming on the windows and then running down them in great pulsing streams, swelling and contracting Jesse&#39;s sunburnt face behind it. They&#39;d forgotten what rain looked like, the way it made flesh glisten look and waxy and sleek.

 Jesse was still smiling as she entered the tavern, her wispy white hair glistening like silk from the doorway. &#39;Would you look at that fellas- plan F, plan fucking F. Who&#39;d have thought it.&#39;
